# The Necessities and Issues with Data Privacy
In this file, I will be talking through two articles on different sides of the ongoing debate of the extent of data privacy. Not only will I present the key arguments of each article, but also add my own comments from a university student's perspective.

## Article 1
In The New York Times' [We Need to Take Back Our Privacy](https://www.nytimes.com/2022/05/19/opinion/privacy-technology-data.html), Zeynep Tufekci emphasizes the rapid growth of technology and surveillance capabilities in recent decades and legislators not writing relevant privacy laws to keep up with the latest technological developments. She further assets that laws need to keep up with technology as without these laws, will have no protection against new technologies as well as means of surveillance. Lawyer Louis Brandeis rested his argument that laws need to enforce our liberty against intrusion, but the Constitution could not have possibly accounted for wiretapping, electronic data, or artificial intelligence when created, but using the basis of protecting our liberty against intrusion, this sets a very strong argument for more privacy laws.

On top of that, with the amount of data that we are unknowingly providing large tech companies such as Google and Facebook (now Meta), researchers have repeatedly shown that it is possible to triangulate different information sources to identify individuals, thus deanonymizing data. In my opinion, this creates a dangerous situation in the ethics of people that have access to data as it would be dangerous for the wrong people get their hands on relevant data. Further adding to her many strong arguments, Tufekci concludes by warning us how our current legal protections are effectively outdated, written in a time that does not account for the many recent developments made (written in 1986 for the protection of the police department searching emails older than 6 months without a warrant). With many strong examples of the lack of privacy protection, Tufekci builds a strong case for more legislation relating to data privacy.

## Article 2
On the other side of this data debate is, Time magazine's [The Problem With Too Much Data Privacy](https://time.com/6224484/data-privacy-problem/), written by Orly Lobel. It is important to note that Lobel does not disregard the importance of privacy, but rather also emphasizes this point. She also mentions that people are rightfully fearful of surveillance when it is designedto use our personal information in harmful ways. However, where Tufekci and Lobel differ is the extent to which data privacy can be detrimental to different aspects of society. Lobel asserts that privacy can conflict with better, more accurate and less biased, automation, especially in the areas of health and medicine. In certain clinical trials, it was found that demographics largely consists of privileged male and white patients which ironically, data privacy has failed to hide the biased and skewed data collection. Because of this Lobel further emphasizes the fact that privacy can hamper advances in scientific research, and to support medical advances, we need more data samples from diverse populations.

The crux of her argument is that the advantage of data is its scale, and privacy hinders that. However, this also impacts us outside of the medical and healthcare industries. Lobel points out that the big flaw with informed consent or opt out methods are that they rely on a fallacy of individual consent. This is a problem because these forms are often signed unread, leading to skewed data around people who truly care about their privacy or those who don't. Yet, research also finds that consumers are often agnostic to privacy settings which also allows companies to intentionally change their default privacy settings, further skewing data privacy settings in their favor. It may be difficult to see from an individuals perspective, but Lobel concludes by saying that "Collection of important data to tackle our toughest social issues is a critical mandate of democracy."


All in all, I do not firmly disagree with either of the authors arguments and agree with both viewpoints to some extent. Both perspectives are valid yet conflicting, so resolving this issue will be a matter of weighing the importance of each, and implementing solutions in a way that does not neglect one perspective to resolve another. I wish I had the solutions to this ever evolving debate, but there may not be a concrete way to resolve both sides of the coin. In a sense, both authors are correct, we do need more privacy laws, yet implemented in a way that important information can still be applied and used to relevant areas to resolve medical, social and other types of issues.